package HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Errors;
# ABSTRACT: FormHandler error methods

=head1 SYNOPSIS

L<Manual Index|HTML::FormHandler::Manual>

Errors and error messages for L<HTML::FormHandler>.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Errors are added to field or form objects by the field 'add_error' method
or the form 'add_form_error' method. FormHandler will perform the 'add_error'
for you for built-in validation or 'apply' actions. When performing your
own validation in a validation method, you must do the 'add_error'
yourself.

Errors, along with 'input' and 'value' attributes, are collected in the
FormHandler 'result' objects. A number of error retrieving methods are
delegated to the field and form classes.

The existence (or not) of errors determines whether or not the form has
been 'validated'.

=head1 Form methods

=over 4

=item errors

Returns an array of localized error strings (both field and
form errors):

    my @errors = $form->errors;

Note: this is a form method, not a result method. For the same thing
from a result object, use C<< $result->form_and_field_errors >>.

=item has_errors

Both 'form' errors and errors from the tree of subfields

    if( $form->has_errors ) {
        <do something>
    }

=item form_errors, all_form_errors

Returns an arrayref / array of error strings on the form (not including
field errors).

    foreach my $err ( $self->all_form_errors ) {
        $output .= "<span class="error">$err</span>";
    }

=item has_form_errors

Does the form have form_errors?

=item add_form_error

Add an error to the form which is not associated with a specific field.

    sub validate {
        my $self = shift;
        unless( <some condition> ) {
            $self->add_form_error('....');
        }
    }

=item push_form_errors

Add a non-localized error to the form.

=back

=head1 Field methods

The most common error method is probably 'add_error', which you
use in the validation process.

    sub validate_foo {
        my ( $self, $field ) = @_;
        unless ( <some_condition> ) {
            $field->add_error('Error condition');
        }
    }

=over 4

=item errors

Returns an array of error strings.

=item has_errors

Does the field have errors? Note that a compound field that contains subfields
with errors will not return true for this method. If you want to know if there
are errors in the subfields, do 'has_error_fields'.

=item num_errors

=item add_error

Add an error to the field. Localization is performed.

=item push_errors

Add an error without localization.

=item error_fields

In a compound field (and its subclasses, like 'Repeatable'), the list
of fields with errors.

=back

=head1 Result methods

The input, value, and error attributes are actually stored in the
result objects. Although most of the methods are delegated to the
form and field classes, there are times, such as when rendering (because you might
be rendering a result that's been peeled off of the form object), that
you may need to use result methods.

These are the main methods that you might need to use.

=over 4

=item has_errors

=item errors

=item error_results

The results with errors; 'error_fields' is a wrapper around this.

=back

=head1 Messages

The base field class and the field subclasses have some 'built-in' error messages.
These can be modified by setting the 'messages' hashref in the form or the
individual fields.

When a message is retrieved in a field with C<< $field->get_message('upload_file_') >>
for example, the 'get_message' method will look first in user-set field specific messages,
then in user-supplied form messages, finally in messages provided by the field classes.

   package MyApp::Form;
   use HTML::FormHandler::Moose;
   extends 'HTML::FormHandler';

   sub build_messages {
       return { required => '....', my_message => '....' };
   }
   ...
   my $form = MyApp::Form->new( messages => { required => '...', ...} );
   ...
   has_field 'my_field' => ( messages => { required => 'Please provide a my_field' },
       required => 1 );

=cut
