package HTML::FormHandler::Manual::FromFF;
# ABSTRACT: converting from HTML::FormFu

=head1 SYNOPSIS

L<Manual Index|HTML::FormHandler::Manual>

Cheatsheet for converting from L<HTML::FormFu>.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Information that may be useful when converting to FormHandler from
FormFu.

=head2 Inside/Outside

FormFu forms look to me like "inside-out" object. The attributes and
code are all set outside of the object. FormHandler forms are the
opposite. Almost all attributes and settings are set *inside* the
form class, although settings can be passed in on 'new' and 'process',
of course. FormHandler fields are built as part of the object
construction process, so you do not create or add new fields after
the form instance has been constructed. There are many facilities
for setting fields active/inactive or changing the various field
attributes, so this is not limiting in what you can do.

One of the big advantages of having form fields and validations, etc,
inside the object is that it makes it a lot easier to test exactly
what you're using in your controllers.

=head2 Config files

There are so many drawbacks to using config files to specify your
forms that I don't see why anybody would voluntarily do it. However
it takes all kinds, so if you really want to use config files, you
can...mostly. There are a lot of things you can't do in config files,
but FormHandler provides so many ways of doing things, that you
can probably get it to work. And sometimes it's easier to update forms
piecemeal, or there may be policies in place, so if you really want/need
config files for building forms, see L<HTML::FormHandler::Foo> and the
test in t/form_setup/config.t.

=head2 Rendering

You should be able to make your FormHandler forms automatically render
very close to FormFu's rendering. There's an example of simple FormFu-like
rendering in t/render/ff.t. Set up a base class with the necessary code,
and your forms could be practically drop-in replacements from a
rendering perspective.

=head1 Filters, Constraints, Inflators, Validators, Transformers

FormHandler doesn't distinguish between these three in the same way
that FormFu does. FormHandler has inflation/deflation, validation
methods, and apply actions. The distinguishing factor is mostly
where it happens in the process.

=head2 Filters

A 'trim' filter is installed by default in FormHandler; it's a
special version of an apply action, and can be set to a transform
or Moose type. See the documentation in L<HTML::FormHandler::Field#trim>.

An HTML filter is applied by default in certain places in the rendering.
You can change it with the 'render_filter' attribute. See
L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Rendering#Rendering-filter>.

You can change the form of the field's value using a number of
inflation/deflation methods, or a transform, or a Moose type.
See L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::InflationDeflation> and
L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Validation>.

Transforms and inflations/deflations do not change what is presented in
the form unless you set the 'fif_from_value' flag on the field.

=head2 Constraints

A lot of these are simple regexes or functions. If they're things
you're going to use often, you probably want to put them in a type
library or validator class.

=over 4

=item AllOrNone

Not implemented. Do this in a form 'validate' sub.

=item ASCII

A simple regex:

   has foo => ( apply => [  { check => qr/^\p{IsASCII}*\z/,
       message => 'Not a valid string' } ] );

=item AutoSet

Not necessary. This is done automatically by FormHandler. You'd have
to go to some work to avoid it.

=item Bool

A simple regex:

    qr/^[01]?\z/

Or you can use the Boolean field.

=item Callback, CallbackOnce

This is just validation done in code. Use one of the many places
you can put validation in methods in FormHandler. See
L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Validation>.

=item DateTime

Use Date or DateTime field or make your own.

=item DependOn

Use 'dependency' attribute in the form. Or do more complicated
things in the form's 'validate' sub.

=item Email

Use the 'Email' field type, or use the the FH Moose Type, 'email'.

     has_field 'email' => ( type => 'Email' );
     -- or --
     use HTML::FormHandler::Types ('Email');
     has_field 'email' => ( apply => [ Email ] );

=item Equal

No equivalent. Perform this check in the form's 'validate' sub.

=item File

Use 'Upload' field.

=item Integer

Use 'Integer' field.

=item Length, MaxLength, MinLength

Use 'minlength' and 'maxlength' on the Text field and its subclasses.

=item Range, MaxRange, MinRange

Use 'range_start' and 'range_end'.

=item MinMaxFields

No equivalent.

=item Number

Use Moose type 'Num'.

=item Printable

Use FormHandler Moose type 'Printable'.

=item reCAPTCHA

Use Captcha field or L<HTML::FormHandlerX::Field::reCAPTCHA>.

=item Regex

Use 'check' action with regex.

=item Required

Set 'required' flag on the field.

=item Set

Use 'check' action with arrayref of strings.

=item SingleValue

Not necessary.

=item Word

This is a simple regex:

    qr/^\w*\z/

Substitute FormHandler Moose type 'SingleWord'.

=back

=head2 Inflators

Use one of the inflation/deflation methods. See
L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::InflationDeflation>.

=head2 Validators

See L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Validation>.

=head2 Transformers

See L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::InflationDeflation> and
L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Validation>.

=cut
