package HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Testing
# ABSTRACT: testing forms

=head1 SYNOPSIS

L<Manual Index|HTML::FormHandler::Manual>

It's difficult to test forms that are instantiated in controllers with 'add_element'
calls and from YAML, and that have no form class. It's one of the reasons that I
don't think that 'dynamic' forms generated with a field_list are a good idea for
anything except the simplest forms. But if you create a form class that contains everything
that is needed for processing the form, it's really really easy to create tests for
forms. Look in the FormHandler 't' directory. It's full of tests for forms.

You can test that the validations work, that the database is getting updated
correctly, even that the HTML that's being rendered is correct. If something
isn't working correctly, it's ten times easier to debug in a test case than
sitting in a controller somewhere. And when you finally start up your application
and use the form, there should be very few surprises.

FormHandler provides a simple function to test whether the HTML output is
correct, 'is_html' in L<HTML::FormHandler::Test>, which uses L<HTML::TreeBuilder>.
If you need to build forms that use the rendering code to produce particular
output, it can be helpful.

=head1 Example

Here's an example of a test, originally copied from one the DBIC model tests.
But you should download the tar.gz or checkout the distribution from github
and browse through the tests.

   use Test::More;
   use lib 't/lib';

   use_ok( 'BookDB::Form::Book');
   use_ok( 'BookDB::Schema::DB');

   my $schema = BookDB::Schema::DB->connect('dbi:SQLite:t/db/book.db');
   ok($schema, 'get db schema');

   my $form = BookDB::Form::Book->new(schema => $schema);

   # This is munging up the equivalent of param data from a form
   my $good = {
       'title' => 'How to Test Perl Form Processors',
       'author' => 'I.M. Author',
       'genres' => [2, 4],
       'format'       => 2,
       'isbn'   => '123-02345-0502-2' ,
       'publisher' => 'EreWhon Publishing',
   };
   ok( $form->process( params => $good ), 'Good data' );

   my $book = $form->item;
   END { $book->delete };
   ok ($book, 'get book object from form');
   my $num_genres = $book->genres->count;
   is( $num_genres, 2, 'multiple select list updated ok');
   is( $form->field('format')->value, 2, 'get value for format' );

   my $bad_1 = {
       notitle => 'not req',
       silly_field   => 4,
   };
   ok( !$form->process( $bad_1 ), 'bad 1' );

   my $bad_2 = {
       'title' => "Another Silly Test Book",
       'author' => "C. Foolish",
       'year' => '1590',
       'pages' => 'too few',
       'format' => '22',
   };
   ok( !$form->process( $bad_2 ), 'bad 2');
   ok( $form->field('year')->has_errors, 'year has error' );
   ok( $form->field('pages')->has_errors, 'pages has error' );
   ok( !$form->field('author')->has_errors, 'author has no error' );
   ok( $form->field('format')->has_errors, 'format has error' );

   my $good = {
      title => "Another Silly Test Book",
      author => "C. Foolish",
      year => 1999,
      pages => 101,
      format => 2
   };
   ok( $form->process($good), 'now form validates' );

   done_testing;
