package HTML::FormHandler::Manual
# ABSTRACT: index of the manual

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is the L<HTML::FormHandler> users manual. HTML::FormHandler is
an HTML form handling class written in Moose. It provides facilities
to write classes that represent HTML forms, and retrieves and loads
data from the database.

=head1 SECTIONS

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Intro>

Creating FormHandler forms and interfacing them
with your controllers.

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Fields>

Organized list of FormHandler fields, with links to specific
documentation.

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Defaults>

Description of the various ways of setting defaults.

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::InflationDeflation>

Inflation and deflation of fields

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Validation>

Validation of fields

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Errors>

Errors: setting them, getting them.

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Rendering>

Rendering options, particularly rendering with widgets

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Database>

Issues and setup for database forms.

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Tutorial>

Builds on the Catalyst tutorial. Step-by-step guide.

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Testing>

Test your forms

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Cookbook>

'Howto' recipes

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Templates>

Cut-and-paste examples of templates to use with FormHandler

=head2 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Catalyst>

Catalyst specific documentation

=head1 L<HTML::FormHandler::Manual::Reference>

Quick reference of FormHandler interface

=head1 SUPPORT

IRC:

   Join #formhandler on irc.perl.org

Mailing list:

  http://groups.google.com/group/formhandler

=head1 AUTHOR

gshank: Gerda Shank <gshank@cpan.org>

=cut

1;
